src/content/blog/singleton.mdx, before:

---
title: Singleton class in Java
author: Nisab Mohd
description: Release of Tailwind Nextjs Starter Blog template v2.0, refactored with Nextjs App directory and React Server Components setup.Discover the new features and how to migrate from V1.
published: 1694890101072
slug: singleton-class
tags:
  - java
  - code
  - pattern
---

The **Singleton** is a useful Design Pattern for allowing only one instance of your class. So, we know that objects are created from constructors hence as many objects can be created from it which defies the property of singleton. So to limit the number of objects the user must not have access to the constructor.

So now user is not able to access the constructor so how will he be able to make objects of that class.

Simply you provide user a custom method which returns the type object of that class and does not allow multiple instance to be created.

Here is an example for singleton class **Database**

```java:Database.java showLineNumbers {7}
//Singleton class
class Database{
    private boolean connected;
    private Database(){
        this.connected=true;
    }
    private static Database instance=null;
    public static Database getInstance(){
        if(instance==null){
            instance=new Database();
        } return instance;
    }
}
```

```java:Main.java showLineNumbers {6}
//Main class
class Main{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        Database db1=Database.getInstance();
        Database db2=Database.getInstance(); // returns same instance
        System.out.print(db1==db2) // true
    }
}
```

Hence now even if the user tries to call **getInstance()** method multiple times it returns the same object reference. Hence we achieved the property of singleton class.

Real usage of Singleton class :

- Hardware access
- Database connection
- Config files

Commit message:

added new blog and added metadata for all pages

src/content/blog/singleton.mdx, after:

---
title: Singleton class in Java
author: Nisab Mohd
description: Singleton classes ensure global access by restricting instantiation to a single instance for shared resources, providing centralized control and consistency.
published: 1694890101072
slug: singleton-class
tags:
  - java
  - code
  - pattern
---

The **Singleton** is a useful Design Pattern for allowing only one instance of your class. So, we know that objects are created from constructors hence as many objects can be created from it which defies the property of singleton. So to limit the number of objects the user must not have access to the constructor.

So now user is not able to access the constructor so how will he be able to make objects of that class.

Simply you provide user a custom method which returns the type object of that class and does not allow multiple instance to be created.

Here is an example for singleton class **Database**

```java:Database.java showLineNumbers {7}
//Singleton class
class Database{
    private boolean connected;
    private Database(){
        this.connected=true;
    }
    private static Database instance=null;
    public static Database getInstance(){
        if(instance==null){
            instance=new Database();
        } return instance;
    }
}
```

```java:Main.java showLineNumbers {6}
//Main class
class Main{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        Database db1=Database.getInstance();
        Database db2=Database.getInstance(); // returns same instance
        System.out.print(db1==db2) // true
    }
}
```

Hence now even if the user tries to call **getInstance()** method multiple times it returns the same object reference. Hence we achieved the property of singleton class.

Real usage of Singleton class :

- Hardware access
- Database connection
- Config files
