src/content/blog/use-debug-value.mdx, before:

---
title: useDebugValue hook in React
author: Nisab Mohd
description: Release of Tailwind Nextjs Starter Blog template v2.0, refactored with Nextjs App directory and React Server Components setup.Discover the new features and how to migrate from V1.
published: 1694890341563
slug: use-debug-value
tags:
  - javascript
  - react
  - hooks
  - code
---

The **useDebugValue** hook is a React hook that allows you to display custom debugging information for a value in the React DevTools.

It takes a single argument, which is the value that you want to display in the DevTools. You can pass any value as the argument, including primitive types like strings and numbers, as well as objects and arrays.

The purpose of **useDebugValue** is to help developers understand what's happening inside a component when it's being debugged in the browser. It can be particularly useful for debugging custom hooks or complex state values that are difficult to understand by looking at their raw values.

To use **useDebugValue**, you simply call it with the value you want to debug inside a custom hook or a component. Then, when you inspect that component in the React DevTools, you will see the custom debug information displayed for that value.

```tsx showLineNumbers  {3}
export default function useClipboard() {
  const [copiedVal, setCopiedVal] = useState<string | undefined>();
  useDebugValue(copiedVal ?? "undefined");
  function copyFn(val: string, cb?: (copiedValue: string) => void) {
    setCopiedVal(val);
    navigator.clipboard
      .writeText(val)
      .then(() => {
        cb && cb(val);
      })
      .catch((err) => console.log(err));
  }
  return [copiedVal, copyFn] as const;
}
```

This is a custom React hook named **useClipboard**. It uses the **useState** and **useDebugValue** hooks from React. It returns a tuple containing the copied value and a function to copy a value to the clipboard.

When the **copyFn** function is called with a value to copy, it sets the copiedVal state to that value and then attempts to write the value to the clipboard using the **navigator.clipboard.writeText()** method. If the write is successful, an **optional callback** function is called with the **copied value**. If the write fails, an **error** is logged to the console.

The useDebugValue hook is used to display the **copiedVal** state value in the React DevTools when debugging the component that uses this hook. If the copiedVal state is undefined, the debug value will display the string "undefined".

<img src="https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1681067873681/f0642c02-a718-4854-9421-d29b0f7d63eb.png?auto=compress,format&format=webp" />

Commit message:

added new blog and added metadata for all pages

src/content/blog/use-debug-value.mdx, after:

---
title: useDebugValue hook in React
author: Nisab Mohd
description: useDebugValue is a React hook that enhances debugging by providing custom labels and values for custom hooks in the React DevTools, improving development insights.
published: 1694890341563
slug: use-debug-value
tags:
  - javascript
  - react
  - hooks
  - code
---

The **useDebugValue** hook is a React hook that allows you to display custom debugging information for a value in the React DevTools.

It takes a single argument, which is the value that you want to display in the DevTools. You can pass any value as the argument, including primitive types like strings and numbers, as well as objects and arrays.

The purpose of **useDebugValue** is to help developers understand what's happening inside a component when it's being debugged in the browser. It can be particularly useful for debugging custom hooks or complex state values that are difficult to understand by looking at their raw values.

To use **useDebugValue**, you simply call it with the value you want to debug inside a custom hook or a component. Then, when you inspect that component in the React DevTools, you will see the custom debug information displayed for that value.

```tsx showLineNumbers  {3}
export default function useClipboard() {
  const [copiedVal, setCopiedVal] = useState<string | undefined>();
  useDebugValue(copiedVal ?? "undefined");
  function copyFn(val: string, cb?: (copiedValue: string) => void) {
    setCopiedVal(val);
    navigator.clipboard
      .writeText(val)
      .then(() => {
        cb && cb(val);
      })
      .catch((err) => console.log(err));
  }
  return [copiedVal, copyFn] as const;
}
```

This is a custom React hook named **useClipboard**. It uses the **useState** and **useDebugValue** hooks from React. It returns a tuple containing the copied value and a function to copy a value to the clipboard.

When the **copyFn** function is called with a value to copy, it sets the copiedVal state to that value and then attempts to write the value to the clipboard using the **navigator.clipboard.writeText()** method. If the write is successful, an **optional callback** function is called with the **copied value**. If the write fails, an **error** is logged to the console.

The useDebugValue hook is used to display the **copiedVal** state value in the React DevTools when debugging the component that uses this hook. If the copiedVal state is undefined, the debug value will display the string "undefined".

<img src="https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1681067873681/f0642c02-a718-4854-9421-d29b0f7d63eb.png?auto=compress,format&format=webp" />
